On the first full moon of the Autumn the harbour in Wolverton comes alive. Floating lanterns are sent down the river to assist in the superstition that light helps the creatures of the deep find their way to the surface where they can be hunted and a feast can be had for all the townsfolk. This is called "Festival of Mesoplodon". Vendors and carts are set up selling festival paraphernalia like masks and horns which commemorate the legend which the festival is named after. They say the light display of every kerosene lantern lit within the city that night can be seen even through the fog. The hundreds of floating lanterns in the river look from above like a fluid golden ribbon running through the city. It's silk winding all the way from the city downstream into the ocean and then disbursing into a beautiful speckled display of lights floating out into the murky void of the unexplored waters. The legend goes that one night a ship was returning from it's maiden voyage. It's purpose was to chart and explore the waters which were said to be abundant with all kinds of creatures. The journey was fruitful and the crew was excited to come back to the city and tell of these toothed whales they called Mesoplodon's. The name comes from a forgotten language which means "armed with a tooth in the center of the jaw". To notice the city of the ships arrival lights were lit all over the vessel. Illuminating everything in it's path the ship pulled into the harbor. People came running to great the ship upon it's return. Something interesting happened as the ship prepared to dock. The water started churning and bubbling. People screamed and hurried away not knowing what this was. All of a sudden creatures popped out of the water. Their heads bobbing above the surface for a moment and then returning to the depths. It was as if the creatures were curious where this glowing ship had lead them. The captain called out to the people on the dock and said "do not worry, these creatures bring us great fortune" let us celebrate their arrival and thank them for the prosperity they bring to our land". Then the captain blew a horn and yelled "let's feast". A few whales were murdered that day to provide food for the city. Upon their slaughter the beautiful mystical creatures fled and were not seen again as they learned to fear people and their vessels. Though a great feast was had that night. And for once in a long time the people felt hope that these creatures may return and bless them with ease of survival once again. Every year the festival goes on. People dance, drink, and eat. Children play games such as the whale, the hunter, and the mage. The mage summons these whales by giving a signal behind the hunters back. The hunter can only turn around when he hears the whale foraging and has to tag the whales before the mage calls them back to safety. The idea of the mage is to let the whales rise to the surface to feed. The whales have to be quiet and sneaky as to not be noticed by the hunter. The game is over when either the whales feed 5 times or when the hunter has tagged them all. When a whale is tagged he stands behind the hunter as his prize. There is legend of mage's that specialize in whale speak. It is a gift given at birth. It is said that these people have whale ancestry and can sense which way a pod is traveling. Often these mage's are used for navigation aboard ships for exploratory cruises. If a mage is adorned with a tooth from a marine creature it is said that his ancestry aligns with his perception and it is easier to find whales. These teeth are precious and highly respected. Only few wear them and these people are often elders. However, those who carry the ancestry also have great respect for these creatures and refuse to use their power to hunt the whale. You must convince them to help your pursuits only if your intentions are good. Lying to an elder with this power is said to cause the whales to understand the threat and thew are warded away from the area. To this day the unspoken communication between whale speak and creatures of the deep is not well understood. It is only a feeling. On the day of the festival in a secluded area a ritual is had where the elders participate in a chant and meditation. They hope to bring the creatures back using their combined power. Different bones are put in the center of the circle of chanting whale speakers to try and summon the toothed beings. Only those who have the ancestry are allowed and not many understand what really happens in the ritual. Whale speak is carried through families and generations. It is a well kept secret so it's power is only used to help these creatures. 

Whale speakers could be changed to not have too many whale related things
Ancestors had connection but since separation they lost that link and try to reconnect during the festival
population and ancients don't partake in the festival for the same reasons. Ancients accuse people of scaring creatures away just because they want to eat them. People believe the ancients are warning the creatures to not come to the lights
Since there's no magic, whale chanters and bones are slightly different. Maybe bones are used in old gps system only the ancients know how to use, transmitted orally down generations. They can still have rituals though to try and reestablish connection with creatures.
All the tales of whale speakers happened in the ancient times
Myths and quite a few people don't believe in it anymore
Ancients are desperate to reestablish link since it's their whole legacy and heritage disappearing. Teeth of Mesoplodons are said to help strengthen the intuitive connection so that's why they dive to find them
Teeth are extremely rare so they are lucky to find one in their lifetime and only wear it when they are responsible enough to carry such an artifact.
It's said it can take a lifetime to understand the responsibility
Traditions are being lost and with that, the hope of reconnecting to such an important part of what they used to be
Not magic, combined intuition and feeling, like a pod of whales navigating the ocean. Wearing teeth make them closer to their ancestors and closer to understanding the Intuition

The captain who came back on that ship one night, Captain Yarokith has a long lineage of sailors. Somewhere along his family lineage there was a boy name Hargedath who decided he was going to save the people and bring these whales back. He was manipulative and cunning. He was always good at convincing people to do things and often rallied boys on the to cause trouble in the town. As he grew older he continued to nurture his dream of exploring the ocean for the Mesoplodon's. By the time he was a grown young man, about 25, he convinced people of forming a crew. One of these people, Kio, was a whale speaker. He was 17 and was just learning the ways. He had grown up close to Hargedath and admired his journey to bring the creatures back. Hargedath advertised his voyage as one for good, however, when they were out on the seas some terrible things happened to Kio. One day Kio overheard a conversation between Hargedath and his right hand man. Hargedath caught Kio easedropping. He was threatened to either lead them to these whales or it was going to be his life. Knowing his plan Kio refused. He withstood terrible torture. It is said the Kio's good heart sent out cosmic pulses for miles warning these whales. Kio's bravery protects them and made the whale speakers very cautious. It is very difficult to convince them to work with townsfolk. however, they are desperate to bring peace and harmony between the world underwater and the world on land. It is said that the fog would thin if all is harmonious between life and people would no longer experience it's oppressing powers. If you are born with Yarokith blood a whale speaker shall shun you. However, the townsfolk respect this wealthy family for how good of fishers and explorers they are. Now, whale speakers over see fishing operations and such in the town trying to preserve the natural environment as they continue to work to summon the whales. When a whale speaker is of age they join cruises within their family where they look on the ocean floor for teeth to help harness their power. Diving is difficult and takes years of training. Townsfolk are not taught how to do this and train their breathing in order to dive long enough to reach deep enough where teeth may lie. People try and spy on the whale speakers voyage to learn where the secret fishing spots are and collect teeth of their own to exploit their value. 

There is a cavern said to glow as if the entire ocean was harnessed into a beautiful glimmering stone. Angel quartz line it’s walls. a small hole in the top where just enough moonlight gets in lights up the cavern with dancing reflections from the water lapping and changing the refraction of light on the crystals. This is the diving place of the whale speakers. You have to be a decent swimmer to make it into the cavern as it is too small to fit a boat through and too long for amateurs to reach by themselves. This is where they dive for mesoplodon teeth. There is a resonant low frequency hum that vibrates throughout its length as a diver plunges into the water in attempts to reach the sands below and thrash about for teeth. This is a sacred place with many paths beneath the surface. The cavern forms a sort of underwater labyrinth. There is no map of this place, you are trained to find the way with instinct. A true test of human will and ancient forces to find ones way to the depths and return with something to show for ones efforts. upon returning fruitless you shall train again and try on the next voyage with the others who are either trying for the first time or who have failed year after year. Upon returning with some kind of animal bone or better yet a tooth this is destiny and you shall adorn yourself with this when you truly understand what the higher workings of the universe has chosen for you to understand. It is great responsibility to try and assume what the universe is saying so whale speakers are often shamed and claimed to be arrogant for adorning their bones before they are of older age. A whale speaker often starts the trials in the cavern when they are 15 and do not wear their prize until they are 55. The most elder wears a headpiece and bracelets of all those bones’ that belong to those whale speakers who have died. The bones are kept precious and never disposed of.

